Okay, the tape is on.
So we'll act straight and all that.
Okay, also, ever president of the series is the bondage.
I mean, you've got the physical bondage of Estre, but you've also got the, I guess,
metaphoric bondage of the whole planet, that sort of thing.
What was the...
Was that just Estre's fate?
I mean, that's when she lived and that's the brakes, folks.
We're all stuck in this physical body and we're also what was, I think, annoying me.
Most was the limitations of logic.
That was the bondage that was bothering me at the time.
I was fooling around with, you know, paradoxes that...
Utilizing the tortoise and the rest of that, trying to make some determination of my own
as to what was going on.
And we were throwing up our hands in that project and saying,
well, you know, there's no way we're never...
While you're in a human body and immersed in time, there's no way you're going to be able
to make any determination as to the nature of time or the degree to which it preceded
motion space, the rest of it, what comes first, the chicken or the egg thing.
So there's bondage on every level.
Certainly the limitations of the intellectual part of what I was talking about.
And I'm just carrying it out and being consistent.
The female and male bondage equally, really, for those characters, they were tremendously
limited by their genetic sexuality.
So I meant it that way, too.
And fooling around with the...
Trying to show people that it's fun, you know, there's an element in young girls which makes
rape fantasies attractive.
And the reality is not in any way attractive.
Trying to point that difference out that it's not nice if it happens to you.
That's another reason I did that.
The first book, particularly, was First Person.
Violence is not fun if you've ever been in a difficult or a violent situation,
ever been tied up or attacked by a hospital or any of the above.
You find that it is an altered state in which you are not happy to be.
And some of that, indeed, was from experience.
We got into a lot of dicey situations during our New York time and the time that we were
underground.
And my husband was a federal fugitive and his life was tough.
So there are the bondages on every level.
But I think for me it was the intellectual bondage combined with the internal bondage of
a person to their own sexuality, whichever sex or sort of sub-set of sex that we have now,
so many open groups of people who are changing sex or choosing to
copulate with the same sex or whatever they want to do.
Everybody is stuck.
Within the bondage of their genetic conditioning, whatever it happens to me,
I mean, you don't see too many people that have transcended on any level
what their genes are allowing them to do and what their physical body is allowing them to do,
as we said before, to Kevin Riech, God's dad, is very frustrating.
The Wind from the Abyss was one of the most frustrating books I've ever read.
And by frustrating, I mean, I was really pulling for Estri and here she was,
this kind of cute little sorority girl again with no brain and no abilities.
And I've read that, I think Tanneth Lee does a good job with that, chapters at a time,
but this was the whole book or at least a good part of the book.
So that's something I really enjoyed was that frustration that,
you know, I wish you'd hurry up and break out of it so we can get on.
That was very interesting. That was quite a good job of writing.
Well, I was really trying to make it real and give them something.
I can bring back to this world and you know, part of the reason that you abstract so far
and the reason I had them have no awareness of our culture and our science and our mores
was so that what is useful and what is in a sense universal will stand out better.
I mean, that's another, that's the value of fantasy if it's done well,
is what is not far and is very familiar.
I'm glad you enjoyed it.
Very much so.
I got to ask this question, where are we in, we earthlings 1983 during the Celestra?
Are these humans that have descended from us or have these preceded us or what?
What's your idea on that?
Well, they're over there having all this right now while we're over here stuck by ourselves.
That's my feeling about it.
But it's all right now out there somewhere.
And we're just not, you know, we're just in the big terms if you consider, you know,
the distances involved and I'm sure you know this, we've only been civilized for a minute.
So nobody would have found us yet if there's something out there.
So it could all be going on exactly now and we just aren't a part of it.
What would our compatibility index be with the Celestrans?
Oh dear, um, dad, well let's say just for this sake of being positive, pretty good.
I would think it wouldn't be too bad.
You mean the chances of you fathering a child on a Celestran woman?
Yeah.
Through the interviewers, 95 percent.
Okay.
Okay, now we come to the the carrion saga or whatever,
carrion books, whatever.
Once again, was this a planned series?
Did you covalently set out to say I'm going to write three books?
Yeah, I was going to do three.
I signed for them before I did them.
Three is all there was going to be.
Three is all there is going to be.
You know, unless something drastically changes, then I see where it's someplace that I'd like to take it.
I knew exactly what I wanted to talk about, the physics and the rest of it.
I was, I wanted to create a female character that had all the flaws that Estri did not.
That was totally opposite.
And to talk a little about politics, I come from a very
political background.
My half sister was Carter, speech radio and economic policy.
I know way too much about politics to suit me.
And I want to talk a little bit about politics and decision making and at higher levels and
what indeed happens to the people involved in it and the people affected by it who have no control of it.
And the nice stuff for me that balanced it off was
the culture that was comfortable with its technology, growing into its technology,
growing along with its technology.
And I mean, for me, the cruisers were the main characters there.
I loved doing the cruisers sections, although they were very difficult at times.
To make it really
seen
as if they were cruisers.
And, you know, one never knows if one succeeded, but for me, they really were cruisers.
Plus, I had the whole of history to draw on.
Instead of having culture that had nothing to do with us,
I had a culture that has everything to do with us.
There has been no collapse, no World War III.
Everything has proceeded at pace and just gotten worse.
The problems with quantum mechanics hadn't been solved.
The problems with it.
Nothing else had been solved.
And we were just sort of muddling along the way we tend to do.
And that, to me, was a lot of fun.
But as I said, I did the partial and it went to auction in two countries on the partial.
And I was so told here in England at the same time had two editors
trying to keep the volumes consistent.
You know, every editor has a different idea of what exactly they want you to do.
And they all want to mix them.
I'm very seldom getting an editor that leaves you totally alone.
It doesn't bother you at all about a book.
And I had to split the difference on one occasion between them
where one editor wanted one section to be longer
and the other one wanted the same section to be shorter.
In the same, just the same 30 pages.
And I ended up doing a prologue which seemed to satisfy them both.
I think they forgot what they asked me to do, but it had to do something super.
So I had done that.
So they were cold-bloodedly meant to be exactly what they are.
But I took terrible risks in that book, that group of books.
That's the only time I've really...
I would go to conventions and I would ask them
if they wanted more science than their science fiction.
Because I'd gotten to a point where I really wanted to see some more science.
And I was wondering if we were becoming dinosaurs.
I mean, here's this one fertile area of fiction.
You can't even write a contemporary novel now and have it be contemporary
without having a good understanding of technology.
Otherwise, you're writing a historical book that was meant for the 40s
that just happens to be the 70s, the 80s.
And people aren't dealing with technology.
They aren't even dealing with the romantic end of it.
No end of it whatsoever.
So I go to these conventions and they'd all raise their hands and say,
yes, they want more science.
And yes, they were ready to work a little.
And yes, they wanted to be challenged.
And I said, okay, well, we don't.
And I wrote a book in which I wrote to my ideal reader
didn't talk down, didn't simplify it,
did what I consider a good job of explaining mathematics as poetry and just left line.
And so far the reaction to it's been very good.
As I told you, the first printing has had been through two
printing before publication or three.
Has been doing very well.
You get some people that don't want to work.
But I think there's enough story there to carry them over the parts
that they are not willing to try to understand.
I want to take this opportunity now to look at the characters.
This I kind of mentioned this on the phone the other night, but this is for the tape.
We're introduced the first character other than Shibat.
And this is Marata, the man.
And he, we like him at first, but then he obviously turns into a bastard.
And then Karen is dislikeable at the first.
I didn't care for him.
And then he turns likeable.
David Spry, I never did like.
I mean, I'm not talking about the way he was written, but the character.
He just bothered me.
And then in the first series, is it Cheyenne?
How was his name pronounced?
Ken, okay.
He was a bastard at first.
And then he turned out okay.
And Sarah kind of switched back and forth.
So the point is your characters do turn out to be, they seem to be one thing.
And then they turn into something else.
And for one thing, most science fiction doesn't have characters this deep.
But they certainly aren't chameleons like this.
And how do you do that?
And what are you driving at here?
Okay.
Well, I find that in life, people tend to show you what they are at the first meeting for one thing.
What you're getting from a person in an initial meeting is what they want to project,
which is usually something that covers their problems.
And very few people are on it.
So a first meeting of somebody is almost always a polar opposite.
They're covering their weaknesses.
They're trying to direct you in a particular direction as to their view of them.
At times you get an impression of what they would like to be if they're very good at it.
And it disintegrates from there.
You can get less than that from people.
But I find in life that you can't judge a person at first meeting.
I knew from the Marata character, initially was meant over the period of one book to turn
from an apparent good guy to a troubled bad guy over the three books.
Hiran was supposed to make that same kind of transition.
And even Shabbat, who is back in a sense of traditional heroin in the first book,
is really an ancillary character in the third book.
So those were structural things that I was doing purposely, consciously, and for fun in those books.
Because I think that they say something about humanity.
But I never lied to you about any of those characters.
Marata's father had a hammer on both those kids from the beginning.
And he told it straight and true exactly what they were.
The other thing that was stated in the beginning, which was consistent,
if one wanted to accept it from the reading, is that all pilots are crazy.
And anybody who becomes a pilot is going to get crazy within what the non-pilots consider sanity.
And as Shabbat became closer and closer to the cruiser,
she did find her relations with humans more and more tenuous.
Spry held back so much information there were hints, right?
In the first book that Spry was not at all what he seemed, and this is
what he wanted to do was very different from what it appeared to be that he was doing.
But he was the most fun of the characters to work with because he was,
he had no pretensions of a higher morality in the term of long-term good beyond his
interaction with the other pilots, what he wanted for them.
And even that was reasonably short-term.
He was just a pragmatist and a mover and shaker, the kind of guy that gets things done.
An intelligence type really is what he is, having known a number of them.
And intelligence types tend to behave very much like that.
You really don't see them until later on.
You must have made some in your work.
Oh yes.
Yeah, if you were ever going to do any more in this milieu, I think a prequel
featuring the old man would be interesting because I hated to see him die off because he was really
a good character, really enjoyable.
Yeah, I felt bad about that too.
I usually give a character a choice.
You want to die now or you want to live along a bit longer.
And with that particular character, he chose his moment.
That was the, you know, he had it together and he got his things done and he had to do.
A prequel would not be a bad idea, it would be fun.
And it wouldn't be that.
What happened was conceptually that I think Earthreams took it about
as far as I would dare take it without a lot of feedback from an audience that
they were willing to go another step into that kind of abstract thought.
I did that to find out if people really, really are willing and interested in putting in that
kind of effort in a book.
And I don't know, you know, I'm going to find out.
I'm going to hear back.
But to take it further would be to get very, very abstract with the concepts involved.
And I would rather back up and do a simpler one.
But you've got to be, you've got to fulfill the things that you say you're going to do in a book.
And I couldn't leave that book without handling the technical problems that I had created.
And I just solved them or at least explained.
Where do you get feedback?
Do you go to cons or do you just think that the sales reflect, the sales are feedback?
Well, I used to go to more conventions than I do now.
One, because I've been doing books out of Sean.
I don't go a lot.
And my research, when I'm researching takes up a tremendous amount of time.
Two, because I'm just, on one hand, I'm arrogant.
I like to control things.
But on the other hand, I'm very sensitive and I can always manage to get offended if somebody says,
I was guest of honor at Catacombs last year.
I did that one.
And I'm going to do Lunacon in March because I really liked that New York crowd.
Otherwise, I mean, my writing schedules is very heavy.
I've got, I just turned in a book.
I just started a book, which is doing just about the amount of time I have to finish it.
I don't have a lot of extra time
to do more than the work that I'm doing.
I'm real conscientious of my homework.
And a lot of times there's, you can never know enough about the subjects that you're writing
about.
And when you're creating whole worlds, you find there's something that you need to know that you
haven't, I mean, physics alone will not get you through a science fiction novel,
nor will any other specialty, not biology.
There's no single thing you can do.
It's going to allow you to create an entire culture and change it.
It's not just creating the culture.
You've got to be able to create it and change it.
So the homework really takes a tremendous amount of effort.
And it's nice to do a fantasy book now as almost as a break or a pay vacation because
that homework I did years ago, and I remember all the things I need to know to do that.
I don't have to, I think I have like three books on my desk,
you know, actually just cosmic fragments, one on Asian fighting styles and a classical
dictionary from Oxford.
And that is all I need rather than, you know, three shelves and the stool and a pile on the
floor of stuff that I have to be able to refer to all the time.
So cons, the kind of feedback you get at cons,
isn't as good as I could see back through letters.
I don't trust reviewers because when my first book came out,
AJ Badres reviewed me twice on the same book and two different publications.
It gave me two totally opposite reviews.
So I learned my lesson early.
But sales figures and letters are really the way, and also, you know, there are readers around
here. I do some, you know, I do book signings and I do small things where I can control it a
little better than I can. It's a real big, I mean, I'll do a World Con or I'd went to England's
to see Con. I do one or two a year, but really all the time that I want to give it,
it takes me about a week. It's a different person that has to go to a con.
My writer is too open. So I had to create another person, my author.
And the author goes to the cons and it takes me about a week to get rid of this author afterwards,
because when you sit at that typewriter, there's no room for you, the writer.
You have to erase yourself so that the characters can be there and the story can come.
And if I'm self conscious or somebody has said something to me about there being too much
science or not enough science or that my books of fantasy is to get really upset with the fantasy
levels, I'm rather take it too much to heart and to react to it on paper and do something to my
story, which I don't want to happen because it's something that's happened. I just got a real
good review in the New York Daily News. And I hate the good ones as much as I hate the bad ones.
They never like them for the right reasons. So the best thing really is just the letters from
people who read them three times and loved them, or who asked me intelligent questions,
which I try to answer. And other writers, sometimes good feedback, especially in the
sanctuary projects where we're all working with the same frame spot and everybody switches
material before it gets turned in. I get good feedback from those people. But I have, in the
end, I've got to be happy with it. If I'm not happy, I hold a book a couple months before it
turned in. And you have a gut feeling if you've left something out or you've screwed up. The
earth seems to be the only time I ever knew that I'd pleased myself. And I wondered whether I was
going to please other people. The only book that I really took it to an extreme that I think was
important to do invaluable in the long term, which may not suit everybody in the short term.
Okay, one of the central themes in the first two Karrion books, especially, was
Shebbett's problem with her magic versus Karrion science. And that seems to harken back to what
you said earlier about your experiences being a logical person who was having problems with
pre-cog and ESP. It's very annoying to have dreams that come true. My specialty is car dreams.
If there's going to be something wrong with my car, I have a dream about it. Two flat tires on
the road to Chicago in the rain, right? So I wake up and we buy two tires and the other two go flat.
I had a knife room where I woke my husband up in the middle of the night, said, brand auto supply,
and went back to sleep. It turned out that the only place in New York City you could get a flat
fixed on Sunday at that point in time with brand auto supply, which I had two weeks later.
This makes no sense to me. I don't like it that these things happen. I have gone to great lengths
to find good logical explanation for something that doesn't make any sense without a lot of
heavy sugar. If indeed consciousness is the only thing that moves and everything else is fixed,
and I'm just getting information from other parts of what is in essence one large feature,
which in my sleep are available to me. That's one way to look at it. Another way to look at it is
just to step forward and backward arrow and you're bouncing around. But whatever it is, there's more
going on in the space-time universe than we have been able to quantify mathematically. There's absolutely
experiments that seem to prove the breakdown of ice and separability. If there's more work to back
that up, then that would be very helpful for me and my personal quandary with these things. But
it does it as an insoluble problem right now, so I tend to keep tackling it. And tackling it with
Shabbat, who was really an ignorant child who took on a veneer of civilization but remained
very primitive throughout, was a nice way to tackle it in the face of all the heavy abstract
stuff. I mean, here's this character who is willing to admit that she doesn't understand the
physics or the space-time manifolds, and if she turns on the cruiser and it goes, it's the same
thing as, you know, I mean, a woman can't change the tire, doesn't know our engine work, but she
can do it. I needed that character and the magic really to balance off the navigation stuff and
the temporal stuff that was going on toward the end of the book.
Okay, unfortunately, I haven't written which book this quote came from, but I have a little
short quote I want to read to you from that and get your comment on it. This is talking about
Shabbat and it says, she agreed with the Karrion position that fiction and fantasy were acid
eating away at the substructure of society, that these could foster nothing but discontinued
malaise. And then the paragraph goes on to say that basically the computers drove away music
and poetry. So here we have the two sides conflicting. Have you resolved that conflict
is really true or can it be resolved? I haven't had the conflict, that's a little joke. I have an
element of sarcastic humor. It's something that I gave the culture. I really don't have any problem
personally with that, but I think that some people do. So when I see something like that,
I will take it to an extreme and put it in. And to me, it's just the form of, I mean, that's in
the same part. And I guess that's an in dream dancer and it's right along there with the guy
who went in the huge Pentagon type building and has been there for 150 years and never came out.
And they kept seeing him, you know, right, right. So those are all the, in a sense, those are
to be taken not too seriously. One gets playful every once in a while. But at the time, I was
a little concerned with the degree at which editors in the field of which there are too few, right?
I tended to want to control what the writers were doing. I mean, somebody asked me for an idea of
what was going to go on in the rest of the books. And I wasn't about to give it to them because I
don't think you should write almost at the same thing. You shouldn't write the same book,
shouldn't tell the same story twice. And I want my first draft to be for everybody,
rather than having to write it once for the editor and write it again for the public.
As I said before, you run a risklier of leaving something out because you've already said it.
I do believe in the freshness of the first draft and although I clean my drafts up and do,
in essence, the second draft when I retie it, I try to keep as much as the original, whatever's
good I keep. So we have a problem for the artist in this society and it's engendered by the people
who are the middlemen who take your art and purvey it to a public who they do not respect.
It's in the sales managers and the art directors and sometimes in the editors,
if you have a good one, you don't feel it. I have a very good one right now and I'm very
comfortable with that. I know writing for this particular editor that if I meet my own standards,
this editor is going to love it and not going to give me any problem about it because it's an
intelligent editor with a good understanding of science and a willingness to admit that she
doesn't know when she doesn't know. I had an editor at one point that stood up, bought a little disc,
based on red said, well, I never took high school science and I don't understand it and I don't
think anybody else will either. Somebody like that should not be editing science fiction,
they should be editing ladies romances. They really don't belong in this kind of field. I mean,
I'm very protective of the right of someone who does this kind of work to experiment and to take
shots. It really is the only free area where you can do it. Our avant-garde is not a viable commercial
area in science fiction because its middle list is. And so you can please the publisher and also
please yourself write something that has some validity that will get people to think. It's
really important that people think for themselves. And here we have an open free society, the only
one in the world in which the information that you're allowed to have is limited pretty much by
your ability to collect information and nothing else. I mean, I had that particle
being stuffed before it was declassified. You can get it if you really want to.
Or you can get enough to know what's going on. There's some stuff that right now I imagine is
pretty highly classified about an EMP defensive weapon. But if you know what EMP is and you know
what it does, then you know what they're working on. We have this right to ask questions, to know
and understand, to get the information here and we don't have it anywhere else. And yet we're
subjected to a sort of censorship by mediocrity. And I don't like that. I think that the value
really of our literature is to give information, to move these people, to get them thinking. And
we get all these lots of science fiction read by kids in my school, bright kids like I was,
where I haven't decided what they want to do yet. So I can move three or four kids to try and find
the answers to those questions. And those kids go into technical fields and do something interesting
and I've done something that I consider important. So in that way, I mean I was angry, but when I'm
angry I make a little joke because I can't be crusader-rabbit and they're not going to change
the world. And all I can do is change the world that I make. So I make a world and I have enough
good things and bad things about it. And I run the characters through it and let them be human in it.
And hopefully we all learn something. I mean they surprise me every once in a while. They come out a
little better or a little worse than I thought that they were.
All right. With regard to that two cultures thing, it's been my experience that scientists
have a lot less trouble with the two cultures than people in the humanities. I mean I know a lot of
scientists, me included, are very interested in philosophy and things like that. And I don't find
a lot of humanities people who are that interested in science or care and are very antagonistic.
And that's always puzzled me, which is why I wanted to ask you about that because I thought it
might be a little bit of a humorous dig. Yeah. That bothers me. I get that too because there are
a lot of so-called literary writers in science fiction, you know, enough of them, so that I have
had run-ins with people who are writing science fiction for reasons that I don't, you know, to
just to make social comment or just to allow themselves literary freedom. Stuff that seems to
me totally valueless. And they come down on me very hard because in a sense, as we're threatened by
the kind of work that I'm doing, they don't want to do that work. I think people with a strong
technical background and who are comfortable with math and with the physical world, you can't
understand the world if you don't understand physics. And to say that to someone isn't itself
upsetting. And you've got a lot of people who grew up and got liberal arts degrees, and they're
finding that it's not helping them with the real world and they're hostile. There's a technological
backlash, which you must be aware of. And they want us if we're going to be technologically
literate to stay out of their world. They don't want to hear about it. They want everybody who is
comfortable with technology to have a very large head, very thick glasses, and stay in their room
and touch a computer. They don't want them out in the world because they feel that the world is their
place. And the sensibilities and the humanities that they're concerned with are somehow threatened by
computers because they don't understand them, because mathematics, because they've never learned it.
By anything, it's just the typical resistance to new things that people have. But I hate to name
writers, but there are people that have good style that are writing science fiction. Who are not
writing science fiction, they just happen to be writing and selling stuff as science fiction so
that they can take advantage of the freedom without doing what I consider paying their dues.
They don't know what they're talking about. They really do not. And they don't belong
between cutters that say science fiction on them. And sometimes, unlike on the
arborist camp, you know, I'm from the technical side, saying, why aren't these people doing any
homework? And why don't they even attempt to understand the world? You can't understand
philosophy at this point in time if you don't get into the mathematical philosophers.
That's where it is. Geocronometry is lost. The philosophical questions of space and time
are the questions in philosophy at this moment. Even 20 years ago was Grimvome and Wirtzell and
those guys that was the leading edge. And so you get these people who are in the so-called
humanities who are trying to live in the late 19th century now. And eventually, they're not going
to be able to make a living doing that. You cannot exclude what is the most powerful society
and still claim to be speaking for that society. You really got me going now. I'm going to
stop. Great. I'm going to get me into a lot of trouble. We remember we had it, so we won't get
you in trouble. My little rupture. Another thing I felt to be an inside joke, which I thoroughly
enjoyed. Maybe it wasn't a joke, but Raphael Penrose, who was a descendant of the well-known
to Roger Penrose, complete with this watch that got passed down. Is that factual? And do you
know Penrose? How did you... I don't know him personally. He's my favorite of all the guys
working in that area. I love Twisted Theory. He makes all the sense to me in the world.
And I have read, assiduously, everything he has written. And the thing about the watch,
Ashley came from... God, what is it? It's a symposium on general relativity. I think Cambridge
published it in which he had a paper talking about particularly his watch. So I thought it would be
a lot of fun to take his watch, but I was betting on him. I sat down and I said, okay, now who is
going to be in 250 years? One guy that's alive today and working now is going to be still valid
and important to that society. And he's my guest. I think that Twisted Theory has a good chance of
proving to be 80% valid. I really like the fact that Twisters have to spend before they have
anything else. And what it's a very complicated... If you're familiar with the concept, you know what
I'm talking about. If not, this is no place to give you a short course on Roger Penwell.
The honest... Yeah, I'm very interested in him as well and have enjoyed that theory,
although I haven't seen much on it in the last year or so.
Right. Well, I think this is a couple of years old. Well, they haven't been able...
They got the basics down and I talked to somebody who is a mediocre physicist and also a science
fiction writer who said an interesting thing to me, which was that I had to, one, he thought of it
when he talked about it. And when I said, well, you know, if he's right, then we don't have anything
left to do and we're all out of jobs. So part of the resistance to the kind of stuff he's publishing
stems from the fact that it just might be that that structure is indeed a bottom line structure.
And he's running into the sort of resistance within the community that everybody runs into,
as they have an actual good idea, God forbid. So there's a sort of self-censorship within those
guys too, but you're right. I haven't seen anything in the last year from him. Doesn't mean that the
structure and what's going on there is any less valid. I could make you with the article I have
from the St. Ken Nelson Post. And if you don't have that, you'd probably like to see it.
Sure. If it's no problem. Well, I'll talk to you about it at the end, which, by the way, will come
eventually don't. I don't have that many more questions. If you're still game, I am.
Okay. Sheba referred to the universe in one of the books is an amenable universe, which I guess is
another name for participatory or anthropomorphic. Basically the same philosophical principle as the
one in Solistria. Okay.
A little more. It was a little more quantum mechanical this time, I think than last time.
And certainly a little more sophisticated, but basically the same kind of structure. And the
amenable universe was found that is, again, if indeed they're giving us everything that we think about,
if one is a co-creator, then as long as we keep delving into smaller and smaller degrees of particle
physics, we will keep finding what we look for. But if twisters are what twisters are, then we found a bottom line.
Now we're going to get into a kind of philosophical question.
Both of the series have female protagonists and they are fully capable individuals. And yet they're
not, I don't think they would make somebody who would be, let's say, a stereotypical feminist happy
I mean. And I'm okay. Do you get feedback from that? And this seems to me realistic. It is post-liberation
and it's why I enjoyed it. But do you get problems with people who maybe get a little PO'd because
Estre gets beaten up and you point out that males and females may actually have
different mathematical abilities and different intuitive abilities.
Well, I have just, I have, you must have seen those studies on why women don't do well at math and
take up math and computers. I'm not making this stuff up. I have a nice degree of facility in math
and I also am good spatially. You know, I shoot well in my pinball right up there. One can develop
these things. It may not be a genetic thing. It might be a conditioning thing. I can't say a lot.
People are working on it, but it is a reality. As far as the rest of it, it's a problem
for females in the age that is coming. If indeed it continues to be the case because without
good technical facility, good math, willingness to deal with computers, there's going to be
dinosaurs. And the same instrument. One can be equal to computer. If one masters the computer,
there's no, there's a potential for real equality and intellectual equality. Now,
this has never existed before, partly because menial labor and physical strength is no longer a great
part of what makes one a functional human being in society and partly because of the concerns of
the society itself. It is not going to happen if women don't start doing their own work in the
areas involved and getting their facility up there. And if I can do it, the rest of them can do it.
There's no reason why anyone should be in a self-inflicted ghetto.
I'd really like to see ladies spending more time trying to become
premier in their field the way a guy has to. I mean, it's a responsibility that one takes on
very early in life. I am going to be successful at something specific besides childbearing.
Not that childbearing is in a nice part of life, but there definitely is more. And I find the
ERA thing very embarrassing. People assume that I am a feminist. And I really don't want to be
associated with a bunch of ladies standing out in the middle of the street screaming for their rights.
It's just not me. I'm not comfortable with them. I don't agree with them. I don't like over
simplification. I don't believe that conditioning is a great part of what makes a person what they
are or that the fact that if you're a little girl and you don't have pockets in your pants,
you're doomed. I don't believe it. A great degree of it is genetic inheritance, but one does have
control over one's own faith. Intelligence will go where you point it. And there are plenty of
intelligent women out there. I'd like to see them do something with that intelligence.
In a sense, I suppose I was throwing the gauntlet, but at times it annoys me. I've ended up on
panels before I knew better at conventions where I look around me and everyone else in that panel
is a woman and someone has put me in a ghetto. And invariably, they all write fantasy or they all
write very light science fiction. And nobody is writing the shortest thing that I'm writing,
and nobody is interested in talking about what I'm interested in talking about. I was at one
where the moderators said, oh, isn't this wonderful? We're all ladies. We'll have a conscious
situation raising fashion. And I just went under the table. It's just not my style. It's not what
I'm interested in. It's not what I'm comfortable with. And I don't even mind if large groups of
females want to organize for their rights, although the Constitution does not guarantee any right,
except the right to struggle to succeed. Nobody's given you the right to have anything gratis
in America, just to try to get it. But they're not speaking for me. And I'm sure they're not
speaking for a large number of perfectly competent, happy females who are doing what they're doing
and have a specific goal, which is not political, i.e., to work in the field, to do good work,
to create a corpus of body, of intellectual work, or technical work, or any other kind of work that
is satisfying. These characters, astray in the positive way and Shabbat almost in a negative way,
do their best to succeed at something. Shabbat, because she's unfocused, has more of the problems
of current day females than astray actually. Astray had more difficult situations to deal with,
but a much simpler society really to deal with it in. And Shabbat in the end opted for what I
considered the best option for her, which was her cruiser, and study, and growing as a person,
which for me was what was necessary for that character to have. And I got letters from people
who said that they cried at the end. I didn't think it was sad. I thought it was a good idea.
But she went off with her cruiser, which is what indeed a pilot is supposed to do, regardless of
sex. And I was very surprised to get a letter like that from a recently intelligent person
who I actually knew. I mean, I knew it wasn't just a letter from a strange fan, it was a letter
from a person I had met, because the reader had put so much of her own values into the story
that the ending was a different experience for her than it was for me to write her. That doesn't
usually happen. Usually they get what I want them to get. And in this case, it didn't have
the values of the person reading it was so different from the values of the character
that it made the reader cry. And although I don't think that's bad, you know, it doesn't
mean that I failed as a writer. I think it says something about the reader. You're going to get
a certain number of readers that way. I've had problems with ultra feminist readers
at conventions in minor ways in the beginning, but mostly from the guys. The women don't
wouldn't read it originally because of the covers and because of subject matter. I'm not going to
again, it's other women writers. I mean, the obvious ones are going to say things to you, the gay ones,
the ones who are very small and kind of mousy and really don't have any background in male-female
relations to speak of will have the reactions that those kinds of people will have when confronted
with a book like that. But the reactions that surprise me were the ones from guys who would
kind of give me a, you know, snicker and try to pat my butt. That's the first thing.
So it's a problem right now, but I don't think most of the people that I know have no
problems within their own sexuality. They just are concerned with the world's sexuality.
And as long as each group of two people get it together, then the world will take care of
itself in this end. We in general will continue as a race, but because of my familiarity with
politics, I'm very aware of how many people find it possible to make a living in this or that
nonprofit organization doing virtually nothing but talking. And there's a great deal of that in
the women's movement. Okay, here, here. I like that. Okay, I've got two more questions. We're